---
title: "Why Change"
date: 2022-03-11
draft: false
weight: 602
---

## Limits of RDBMS

The limits of relational database management systems (RDBMS), such as MySQL, SQL Server, and Oracle, are not sufficient to manage large amounts of data. They include:

* Scalability
* Speed
* Others
    - Queryability
    - Sophisticated processing

Database choices:

* File systems
    - Other fields
    - HDFS (Hadoop Distributed File System)
* Databases
    - NoSQL (key/value,columnstore, etc.)
    - RDBMS (MySQL, SQL Server, Oracle, etc.)

Hadoop and HBase:

* Hadoop uses an alternative file system (HDFS)
* HBase is a NoSQL database (wide columnstore)

## CAP theory

* Consistency
    - Transactions
* Availability
    - Up-time
* Partitioning
    - Scalability

Traditional RDBMS has consistency and availability but is known for having difficulty in partitioning. The CAP theory says that a database system can really only meet two of the three aspects of CAP theory.

What Hadoop fits are:

* Scalability (Partitioning)
    - Commodity hardwate for data storage
* Flexibility (Availability)
    - Commodity hardware for distributed processing

## Understanding big data

What kinds of data for Hadoop?

* LOB (Line of Business)
    - Usually transactional and not a good fit
    - good fit for RDBMS
* Behavioral data
    - data that can be batch processed
    - not a big deal if missing a small amount of data
    - good fit for Hadoop

Hadoop is not a replacement for RDBMS, it's a supplement. And often, it comes with the need to also add a NoSQL system.

## Quiz

1. Which statement is true about Hadoop? (D)
    * It adds a wide column store capability.
    * It provides a fast NoSQL database.
    * It replaces your existing RDBMS.
    * It will commonly be used as an alternative file system.

2. Which type of example data would be best suited for Hadoop? (C)
    * records of ACH banking transfers
    * flight schedules for a major airline
    * customer purchasing data for sales analytics
    * databases of patient prescriptions

{{< hint info >}}
Non-critical data about a customer's interactions with a business is an excellent fit for Hadoop. HDFS supports storing unstructured data in a manner that is scalable and accessible.
{{< /hint >}}

3. Which type of data is a good fit for Hadoop? (D)
    * money-related activities
    * medical diagnostics
    * transactions
    * behavioral

4. In the context of CAP, consistency supports _____ while partitioning supports _____. (B)
    * up-time; availability
    * transactions; scalability
    * availability; transactions
    * complexity; flexibility

5. Which aspect of the CAP theory does Hadoop gain the most benefits in comparison to traditional relational databases? (B)
    * availability
    * scalability
    * flexibility
    * consistency

{{< hint info >}}
The infinite scalability of Hadoop allows storage of any potential size to be partitioned any kind of hardware, even commodity servers.
{{< /hint >}}

6. Which statement about the use of relational databases for big data projects is true? (A)
    * Relational databases lack the scalability and speed to accommodate most big data projects.
    * Relational databases have no use anymore.
    * Relational databases have superior scalability and speed for big data applications.
    * Relational databases support sophisticated processing techniques for machine learning tasks but lack scalability for big data projects.

{{< hint info >}}
While relational databases such as MongoDB and SQL variants will always have their uses, requirements for big data projects have generally grown beyond the ability of relational databases to deliver.
{{< /hint >}}
