---
title: "What is Hadoop"
date: 2022-03-13
draft: false
weight: 603
---

## Introducing Hadoop

Hadoop consists of two components and a set of projects. Two components are the Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS), and the processing API, which is called MapReduce. Other projects and libraries include HBase, Hive, Pig, etc.

Hadoop distributions include open source and commercial versions. The core distribution is called Apache Hadoop, which is free and open source. Commercial versions of Hadoop are called Cloudera, Hortonworks, MapR, etc. Commercial distributions wrap around some version of the open source distribution and they will provide addtional tooling and management along with other libraries. It is also common for users to use Hadoop clusters on the cloud. 

| Open Source | Commercial | Cloud |
| ----------- | ---------- | ----- |
| Apache Hadoop | Cloudera | AWS |
|  | Hortonworks | Windows Azure HDInsight |
|  | MapR |  |

## Hadoop Distributions

There are several ways to use Hadoop on public clouds.

* IaaS - you install/manage (Use VM/Docker images)
* PaaS - verndor provides image and management

Apache Hadoop main site is [http://hadoop.apache.org](http://hadoop.apache.org). However, it is recommended to use **PaaS** for Hadoop beginners. In this course, we will use `Dataproc` under the Google Cloud Platform. Amazon also has an offering called `EMR`. 

## Difference between HBase and Hadoop

HBase and Hadoop are two different things. HBase is a distributed database, while Hadoop is a distributed file system.

## Future of Hadoop

In this course, we are going to explore

* Hadoop Developer
* Hadoop Administration
* Hadoop Architect

## Quiz

1. Which statement is true regarding the Hadoop market? (C)

    * Hadoop growth is relatively slow.
    * Hadoop is a relatively narrow ecosystem.
    * Hadoop is considered a top job trend.
    * Hadoop implementation only requires developer skills.

2. What is HBase used for? (B)
    * tuning the underlying Hadoop file layout
    * making Hadoop data accessible to less technical teams
    * natively accessing the Hadoop file system
    * writing the MapReduce processing logic

3. As a beginner, which distribution should you consider for quickly setting up a core Hadoop instance? (D)
    * Apache Hadoop's core package
    * a Hortonworks platform
    * a Cloudera platform
    * a PaaS solution, such as Google Dataproc

4. Which Hadoop component functions as the processing API? (A)
    * MapReduce
    * HDFS
    * Hive
    * Hbase

{{<hint info>}}
MapReduce is a processing method and a distributed computing application architecture written in java.
{{</hint>}}

5. Which Hadoop distribution is open-source? (A)
    * Apache Hadoop
    * Cloudera
    * Hortonworks
    * MapR

{{<hint info>}}
Apache Hadoop is a series of open-source software utilities that make it easy to solve problems utilizing massive amounts of data and computing using a network of many servers.
{{</hint>}}

6. Which Hadoop function does the MapReduce component handle? (B)
    * library consolidation
    * processing API
    * data storage
    * cloud distribution

7. Which level of abstraction would be most accessible for analysts? (A)
    * HBase
    * Java
    * MapReduce
    * HDFS

{{<hint info>}}
HBase is an open-source non-relational distributed database that is similar to a wide column store, which should be familiar to SQL veterans.
{{</hint>}}

8. In which type of Hadoop distribution does the vendor provide and manage the image as a service categorized as? (B)
    * Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)
    * Platform as a Service (PaaS)
    * commercial
    * open-source

{{<hint info>}}
Software as a service (PaaS) or application platform as a service (aPaaS) is a cloud-based service delivering a platform that allows customers to develop, run and manage apps without the complexities of creating or managing the typical app-development infrastructure.
{{</hint>}}
