---
title: "Java Fundamentals"
date: 2022-04-15
draft: false
weight: 801
---

# Introduction to Java

In this lesson, we'll cover some fundamentals - such as why you would want to learn Java, and what prerequisites you'll need to succeed in the course.

## Course Overview

Glossary
You can click [here](https://video.udacity-data.com/topher/2021/January/5fef31c7_jpnd-c1-java-fundamentals-glossary/jpnd-c1-java-fundamentals-glossary.pdf) to download a PDF with all of the key terms used throughout this course. You can also access this at any time from the Resources section found in the left-hand menu of your classroom.

Course Outline
Here's an outline of the lessons in this course, for your reference:

Lesson 1: Introduction to Java
In this lesson, we'll cover some fundamentals—such as why you would want to learn Java, and what prerequisites you'll need to succeed in the course.

Lesson 2: Java Basics
This lesson covers all the major building blocks we need to create a simple Java app, including keywords, variables, loops, methods, access modifiers, arrays, and Javadoc.

Lesson 3: Defining Classes
In this lesson, we'll learn about what an object is, what a class is, and how we can create (or instantiate) objects from classes.

Lesson 4: Object-Oriented Programming
In this lesson, we'll go deeper into objects and classes and learn about some of the advanced concepts of object-oriented programming, including inheritance and polymorphism.

Lesson 5: Common Types
We'll learn about some of the important class types provided by the Java API, including Exceptions, Enums, RegEx, Dates and Calendar, and advanced String features. These types will help us do a number of very useful things, such as handling errors, looking for string patterns, and storing and retrieving dates.

Lesson 6: Generics and Collections
Working with multiple types can introduce some challenges. In this lesson we'll learn how two tools—generics and collections—can help us address these challenges and make our code type safe.

Lesson 7: Advanced Collections
In this lesson we'll learn about some additional, more advanced types of collections: Maps, Sets and Queues. Each of these provides a uniquely powerful data structure that, when used correctly, can solve complex problems efficiently.

