---
title: "Introduction to the Data Profession"
date: 2022-01-27
draft: false
weight: 31
---

## Data Science

Data science is the systematic study of the structure and behavior of data in order to quantifiably understand past and current occurrences, as well as predict the future behavior of the data.

## Typical traits of data scientists

* Degree in quantitative field
* Programmers
* Curious and tenacious personalities
* Previous experience: BI (bussiness intelligence) reporting, data analysis, and data-driven decision making.
* Interested in why over how
* Spends hours analyzing complex questions
* Data scientists derive insights from data, including big data (data from data engineered systems)
* Uncover correlations and causations in business data to rupport business decision-making
* These people generate predictions from data and communicate predictions through data visualization.

## Typical Competencies

* STEM degree, with advanced math
* Coding: Python, R, SQL, Spark, machine learning

## Compared to Data Engineering

Data engineering is the design, construction, and maintenance of data systems.

Typical traits of data engineers:

* Programmers
* Good at math, but don't use statistics much
* Previous experiences: database architect, ETL (extract, transform, load) developer, database developer, security architect, etc.
* Prefer to design and build IT systems rather than to analyze data
* Interested in how over why
* Data engineers design systems to collect, handle, and store big datasets
* Data engineers build modular, scalable platforms for data processing
* These people design, build, and maintain systems that store and move big data

Typical Competencies:

* Computer science, software engineering
* Coding: Java, C++, Python

## Data anylytics

Data analytics are data products that describe data and how it behaves. These data products are generated from data analysis and visualization precesses.

Analytics specialists typical traits:

* Use applications to analyze data
* Solid in basic math
* Understand the inner workings of a business very well
* Enjoys using data insights to improve business
* Not into deep analysis

Analytics specialists typical tasks:

* Generates predictive, prescriptive, and descriptive data insights
* Uncovers correlations and causations in business data to support business decision-making
* Deploys analytics technologies: analytics software applications

## Challenges

Think about yourself, your background, and your true passions. Which of these fit you best?

* Data scienctist
* Data engineer
* Analytics specialist