---
title: "Introduction"
date: 2022-03-15
draft: false
weight: 701
---

The major databases or software that use SQL include MySQL, PostgreSQL, Microsoft SQL Server, Oracle, Amazon REdshift and many others.

## Overview of databases

* What are databases?

Databases are systems that allow users to store and organize data. They are useful when dealing with large amounts of data. Typical users of databases are analysts, technicians, and developers, and anyone needing to deal with data!

* Why we use databases?
    - Data integrity
    - Can handle massive amounts of data
    - Quickly combine different datasets
    - Automate steps for re-use
    - Can support data for websites and applications

Tabs in spreadsheets are similar to tables in databases. Columns and rows in a spreadsheet can be considered the same as columns and rows in a database.

## PostgreSQL and PgAdmin setup

In this class, we are going to use PostgreSQL and PgAdmin to do the practice exercises.

1. Download and install PostgreSQL. Download PostgreSQL at [PostgreSQL website](https://www.postgresql.org/download/) and double click installer. You must remember the password you set.

2. Download and install PgAdmin. Download PgAdmin at [PgAdmin website](https://www.pgadmin.org/download/).

3. Download [dvdrental.tar](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1oBxiJkST9-7IjOMY-8aMXEMbrL6XcX49/view?usp=sharing) file but don't open it so far. This is a compressed version of the database we are going to use for this course.

4. Restart your computer.

5. Restore the database. Ignore Failed Exit Code if it apprears. Open up PgAdmin, right click the PostgreSQL server, choose `create -> database`, and enter `dvdrental` as database name. Right click `dvdrental` and choose `restore`. Choose the file you downloaded earlier.

6. Test. Right click `dvdrental` and choose `query tool`. Enter `SELECT * FROM film;` and hit `execute`.

## PgAdmin overview

PgAdmin is a graphical interface for PostgreSQL. It is a good tool for managing databases. Open up PgAdmin to explore more. For example, we can change theme color, change font size, change font, etc in the `Preferences` tab.
