---
title: "Data Structures: Hash Tables"
date: 2022-02-06T00:00:00.000Z
draft: false
weight: 48
---

## Hash Tables: Introduction

In computing, a hash table (hash map) is a data structure that implements an associative array abstract data type, a structure that can map keys to values. A hash table uses a hash function to compute an index, also called a hash code, into an array of buckets or slots, from which the desired value can be found. During lookup, the key is hashed and the resulting hash indicates where the corresponding value is stored (Source: [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hash_table)). A simple real-world example of a hash table would be a dictionary. (See [reference](http://mathcenter.oxford.emory.edu/site/cs171/hashTables/)).

Hash functions are used to convert a string into a number. The number is used to index into a hash table. Hash functions are 

**one way**: we can convert a string into a number, but we can't convert a number back into a string.

**deterministic**: the same string will always have the same number.

`Dictionary` is Python's built-in hash table data structure.

## HT: Collisions

Collisions are the result of a hash function producing a number that is already in use. In a hash table, collisions are resolved by using a separate chaining technique. Another way of dealing with collisions is to move to the next bucket until an empty slot is found - this is called linear probing. Linear probing is one of the open addressing methods.

## HT: Constructor

```python
class HashTable:
    def __init__(self, size = 7):
        self.data_map = [None] * size
      
    def __hash(self, key):
        my_hash = 0
        for letter in key:
            my_hash = (my_hash + ord(letter) * 23) % len(self.data_map)
        return my_hash  

    def print_table(self):
        for i, val in enumerate(self.data_map): 
            print(i, ": ", val)

my_hash_table = HashTable()

my_hash_table.print_table()
```

## HT: Set

